In this unit we're going to talk about
the overall Hack Computer architecture.
And, we're going to give
you all the information,
which is needed in or,
in order to actually go out and build it.
So, here we see the overall hardware
architecture of the Hack Computer.
And, we see that we have
something new here.
We have two fancy input output devices.
In particular, we have a raster
display unit that enables us to
take values from the computer, and
actually display them in some sensible
way that makes sense to humans.
And, we also have a keyboard
unit that will enable us to
interact with a program that
currently runs in the computer.
Assuming of course,
that this program accepts us to
to enter some values into it.
So, this is how the computer looks like,
and
as usual, it pays off to
think about the obstruction.
So from the user's perspective, or
from the programmer's perspective,
we have some sort of a black box magic,
or a computer that enables us to write,
to run on it programs within
in Hack machine language.
Now, this is not to be taken lightly
because if, for example, we would a write
a, a Java compiler that translates
from Java to Hack machine language.
Well, this computer will be
able to run Java programs.
And in fact, this is something that
we do something very similar to this
in the second part of the course.
Which we will describe at
the end of this course.
So abstractly,
we have a general purpose that
can run any program that can be
translated into Hack native code.
So, this is the top down description or
abstraction of this computer.
We can also describe
this computer bottom up.
How do we build this computer?
Well, it turns out, we can build this
computer using some of the chips
that we built previously in this course,
that actually you built.
And, all we have to do is put them
together in some judicious way, and
we'll get an architecture
that enables us to
realize the abstraction
that we just described.
So once again,
this is the overall architecture.
And what we'll do in this unit is focus
on every one of these three pieces,
and describe first of all, what it does.
And second of all, how can actually,
how we can actually build it.
Let us start with the CPU, which is
the centerpiece of the architecture.
And, I don't want to talk too much
about the CPU because I just spent
about 20 minutes talking about
it in the previous unit.
So, I'd like to kind of gloss over what
the CPU is supposed to do in the overall
hardware architecture.
Here is the interface that we've
seen in the previous unit.
And, let us explore this interface
in the context of three possible
Hack instructions.
How will the CPU, or
how does the CPU supposed to do
to deal with these instructions?
Well, everything is being done
according to Hack language
specification contract if you will.
So, if the instruction mentions the
pneumonic's D and A, the CPU is going to
manipulate the respective D and
A registers, which reside inside the CPU.
If the instruction is an a instruction,
well in this case the CPU
is going to take the data value, the 15
bit, so called x in this instruction.
And, it is going to put
them inside the A-register.
If the right-hand side of
the instruction mentions
the pneumonic M,
then the CPU expects to see this value or
some data value in the NM
input of the CPU interface.
That is this input is supposed
to contain the value of
the currently selected
data memory register.
And, if the instruction's left
hand side contains the numonic
M as one of the destinations
of the operation, and
we see it in the last example here,
in the third instruction in the slide.
So if this is the case,
then the value output should
be stored in the main memory.
In this case, we discussed it before.
We have to provide three different pieces
of data: the value that we want to store,
the address, where we want to store it,
and the control bit.
So, this is done by the CPU, in the way
that was discussed in the previous unit.
Moving along,
let's see how the CPU handles jumps.
So once again, we have a typical,
jump situation.
The A register already includes,
the address 100.
We, we assume that this is the case,
and now we have a conditional jump.
D equals D minus 1.
And if the result of this operation or
the area output is zero, we want to jump.
Jump where?
To the address that was specified before,
to 100.
How do we do it?
Well, if reset equals zero,
which is normally the case
when a program is running.
Reset equals zero because the user
doesn't touch the reset button.
Then, the CPU logic uses the jump bits and
the ALU output to decide whether or
not there should be a jump.
If there is a jump,
PCs set to the value of the A-register.
If there's no jump, PC is incremented, and
the updated PC value is emitted
by the PC output of the CPU.
If reset equal 1,
it means that the user wants to reset,
and rerun the program from the beginning.
So in this case, PC is set to zero,
and that's the end of the story.
So this, in a nutshell,
is the contract according to which
the CPU is supposed to operate in
the overall computer architecture.
Moving along,
let us discuss the data memory.
The data memory, if you recall,
is the area in which we
store all the data of the program,
and and here is how we do it.
Well, if we think about this data
memory from a programmers perspective,
it's convenient to think about it in
terms of three different segments.
Or logical segments, if you will.
Addresses 0 up to 16k are used
to store the data that the program
generates and manipulates.
The next 8k of the memory are used
to store the screen memory map.
If you want to draw something on,
on the screen,
you have to manipulate bits
in this memory segment.
And finally, the last register in
the memory is used to reflect or
to tell us which key is currently
being pressed on the keyboard.
Now once again,
this is an obstruction, right,
this is how the programmer expects
this this memory to, to operate.
And now, let's us turn to discuss
how we actually make it happen.
Well, we do it by building the memory from
three different sub chips, if you will.
Or chip parts,
as we call it in our HDL jargon.
So, the first segment is
just a standard RAM chip.
The second segment is a, a,
special chip called screen.
And, the last segment is yet another
special chip, which we call keyboard.
And in the next few minutes,
I want to say a few words about
every one of these chip parts.
So, let us start with the RAM.
The RAM is trivial.
We've built it in in
project three I believe.
One of the chips that you
built was called RAM 16.
So we just plug it in, and this gives
us the the necessary Implementation.
And notice, that the inputs and outputs of
the RAM 16 are identical to the inputs and
outputs of the overall, memory chip.
So whoever builds this chip has to make
sure to take the outside, inputs and
outputs, so, so to speak, and connect
them, make the connections that will
funnel these values into the inner chip
box, into the RAM, RAM 16K, chip box.
Moving along, the next segment
in the memory if you recall,
is called screen, and before we talk
about the implementation of this,
memory segment, let us remind ourself,
what we mean when we say memory map.
Now we discussed it at length when
we talked about hack programming.
So I'm not going to repeat it,
I will just gloss over the main ideas.
So, we assume that we have,
a display unit consisting of so
many rows and so many columns.
It's a black and white, display device.
We assume that we have an area in
the memory that controls these units so
that when we chain the,
when we change bytes in this, special,
memora, memory, area, the architecture
refreshes the screen accordingly.
And this refresh happens several times.
Each, each second.
Now there is also a mapping that tells
us how to relate, organize with pixels,
on the display unit with specific
bits in the, in the memory map.
And, once again we discussed this before,
you are more then welcome to stop
the video and,
make sure that this mapping makes sense.
And this is how the memory map is,
specified and, designed in
the context of a Hack computer.
So how do we implement it?
Well, we use a special
built-in screen chip that
knows how to automatically quote unquote
refresh a connected display unit.
Now I want you to notice
that in the most part
there's nothing special about this chip.
It's just a regular RAM chip.
However, it has this nice side effect of
refreshing, a connected, display unit.
So, this is the chip that we are going to
use in order to implement, the memory,
sorry, the,
the display effect of our computer.
Moving along, what about the keyboard?
Well, the keyboard is implemented
with a single register,
a 16 bit register, which we call Keyboard.
And, this register is connected
to a standard keyboard,
similar to the one that
you are currently using.
And, we discussed it, once again
we discussed it in, in week four.
How do we handle inputs?
Well, if we don't touch the keyboard,
the keyboard, register is going
to emit the value zero, oh, and
it's going to contain the value zero.
If we take our finger and
touch or press one of these keys,
the scan code of this key is going to
be stored inside the keyboard register.
So for example, if we press k,
it turns out that the scan
code of k is 107 and 107, 107 Is going
to appear in binary in this register.
So as long as our finger is down,
we'll see, 110, 1011.
Once we take the finger,
away, it will show 0.
Likewise, if we, click something else,
the number four, turns out
that the scan code of four is 52, we see
this value if we click space we see 33.
If we click up arrow
we see something else.
So that's the deal,
that's how the keyboard operates and
what we see in the keyboard is called, or
is usually called, a keyboard memory map.
How do we implement it?
Well once again,
we use a special chip which,
is connected to the keyboard and
as I said before I want to repeat it.
Now there is nothing
special about this chip.
It's a regular register It
has a nice side effect.
And the side effect is it always reflects
what the user is pressing on the keyboard.
And most of the time it's zero, because
most of the time the keyboard is not used.
All right, how do we, read the keyboard?
Well, we talked about it in week four.
To read the keyboard, we simply probe the
output of the keyboard register, right?
We see that keyboard register has an
external state that we don't see in this
diagram here but
it also has an output, pin
just like any regular register so we can
read what comes out from the keyboard and
from this information we know,
which key is currently pressed.
But if we use the keyboard in
the overall context of Hack memory,
we have to probe the contents
of memory register 24 or
24,576 because this happens to be
the address, of the keyboard, interface,
or the keyboard, memory map with in the
overall output space of the memory unit.
Okay, so, we know how to handle,
how to, handle and, build roughly the CPU.
We know how to implement the, memory.
We are going back to,
the overall computer architecture.
And, I've added,
something little to this architecture, and
this is the, reset button.
I want to remind you that if we actually
set out to build this computer,
we're going to have a black box with
a reset button, and this reset button
corresponds in my diagram to this, orange,
reset, oval that you see in front of you.
And we're going to refer to this reset,
in the remaining slides in this unit.
Okay.
So with that in mind,
the next thing that we want to,
implement is the instruction memory
of the Hack, computer system,
and we implement this instruction memory
using, a chip which we call ROM 32K.
Let us assume that we have this
computer sitting on the table, and
next to this computer, we have a program
written in the Hack, machine language.
In order to run this program,
the first that we have to do is somehow
load it into the computer, right?
So, we load it into the computer.
And in particular,
we load it into the ROM 32K chip.
We press the reset button
that we just discussed, and
the program will start running.
This is the obstruction
that we want to implement.
Now, I am sure that many of you
are scratching your head and saying,
well how do you actually get a program
which resides on a piece of paper or
in some text file and
put it inside the computer.
Well it turns out that there
are several ways to do it.
One of them is to use
plug-and-play ROM chips.
So, we burn our code, the machine
instructions code into a RAM chip.
We take this RAM chip, we plug it into
the computer, we press the Reset button,
and the computer will start executing
this, this particular program.
If we want to run another program,
we take this chip out, and
we plug in another ROM chip that
has another program burned into it.
And this is actually quite similar to
the way some game consoles operate.
You have some cartridges
with games that you plug in.
You play a certain game.
You want to play another game, you,
you plugin another cartridge and so on.
So that's one way to, to implement it.
Another way to implement it is
using hardware simulation and
that's what we what we are going to do in,
in this course.
We use a hardware simulator.
If we use a hardware simulator, we have
the freedom to do many different things.
And indeed, we are going to use
a built-in ROM chip that actually,
once again, there's nothing special
about it because it operations
very similarly to a RAM that
you built-in in, project three.
But it has a nice side
effect that it allows you,
using simulation to load programs into it
residing programs that are residing
on regular text files.
And let me take a minute and and
illustrate how this is actually being
done in our hardware simulator.
Welcome to the Hack CPU Emulator.
The CPU emulator is a Java program
that gives you a visual rendition
of what is happening inside the Hack
computer when a program is being executed.
And indeed, if you look around,
you will see all sorts of familiar
elements from the heck platform.
On the left-hand side,
we see the instruction memory and
right next to it, the data memory.
And below, we see the current
value of the A-register here and
the current value of
the D-register there and
there's also a visual rendition
of the ALU operation.
Another control of interest is this one,
which shows you the current value
of the so-called program counter.
The program counter is a register
that contains the address of
the instruction that will be
executed next in the program,
which is currently loaded
into the instruction memory.
Now right now, we have no program
in the instruction memory,
so lets go ahead and load one.
So, I click this control here and I have
this folder called program examples.
So, I'm going to select it.
And inside program examples,
there are all sorts of Hack programs.
I'm going to select the first one,
add2and click the Load ROM button.
And I see that now the instruction
memory contains what seems to be
a sequence of Hack machine instructions,
written in assembly.
[COUGH] I'm sorry,
written in assembly language.
Now, if I want, I can look at these
instructions in binary format.
And yet as we argued before, it's much
easier to think about the program and
display it and understand it when it's
visualized using these assembly comments.
Now, according to the rules of the game or
more precisely,
according to the rules of this program.
In order to run it, we first have to
enter some numbers into the the RAM.
So let's see.
I'm going to enter, let's say,
12 here and 7 there.
These are completely arbitrary values.
And hopefully, the program will end
up summing up these two values and
putting the result in in RAM 2.
So to check that this
is actually the case,
I can begin running the program and
I do it by using this
visual metaphor here of
an advance of sort VCR control.
So let's, let's advance and
execute the first instruction.
Well, nothing dramatic happened let
us execute the next instruction and
I see that the D-register became 12.
So we managed to load the contents
of RAM 0 into the D-register.
Moving along, I now execute the next
instruction, which was at one.
And indeed, I see that the value
of the A-register is now one.
Let's do the first instruction
D equals D plus M.
And indeed, we see that the current value
of D became 19, which is 12 plus 7.
And finally, we execute at two,
which selects this
register here in In the RAM register
number two, I see it here as well.
And finally, M equals D.
And indeed, we see that RAM 2 became 19.
So, lo and behold, it looks like
the program is actually working.
Now notice that the program
counter is six, so
if I keep on executing commands
I will continue to execute
whatever resides here in
memory in all these addresses.
Which is a little bit worrisome and
I will get back to talk about
it a little bit later on.
All right.
Now let us suppose that we want to
rerun this program from scratch.
So what we can do is rewind the program,
so to speak.
Now there's no rewind in, in computers but
this visual metaphor here indicates that
the program counter has been set to zero.
And this actually causes
the computer to to set itself to
a position in which it can start
executing this program again.
So we can, you know,
try some other values here.
Let's, let's enter just the first
value is now minus five and
I'm going to rewind once again.
And now, I'm going to fast forward,
which actually means, just, you know,
let the whole program execute
automatically, so to speak.
So we see that the program is indeed
executing without any help from us and
let us pause it for a little while and
we see that we got the right answer,
which is 2 minus 5 plus 7 is 2.
And if we continue to execute
it the computer will kind of,
spin its wheels, so to speak and
will execute all these null instructions.
And indeed, we see that nothing's
actually happening, but
the program's kind of out of control and
we have to think about way to resolve it.
But for now, what is more interesting
is the fact that we learned
how to execute a program and how to
inspect the various controls here and
convince ourself that the program is
actually doing what it's supposed to do.
So now that we understand how
the ROM comes to play in simulation,
let's go back to the general
specification of the ROM.
It's almost a regular memory chip.
It has an address coming in.
It has some output coming out.
It's a ROM device, read-only, so
we don't have any machinery
that enables writing into it.
And if you recall,
the output of of the ROM is always
the contents of the register that
is selected by the address input.
So, if I enter 17 into the address input,
what will come out is the contents
of register number 17.
So, it makes a lot of sense to take this
ROM and connect it to the program counter,
because the program counter always admits
the address of the next instruction.
So, if we feed this address into the ROM,
we are guaranteed that
the ROM will always admit.
A 16-bit value that we can treat
as the current instruction.
And if the PC is doing what it's
supposed to do, then in every cycle,
the PC will provide
The address of the next,
instruction that we want to, execute.
And this is after taking into
consideration all the go tos and
the conditional go tos and, and so on.
And what will come out from the rung
is always the current instruction
that we want to execute.
As if by magic.
Of course we know that
there's nothing magical here,
because we're going to build everything,
all of this ourselves.
So, having said that we can
now finally rap up this,
discussion and talk about how we build
the overall computer architecture.
Okay, so we start with the CPU and
as was just discussed,
we connect to it the instruction
memory which we call ROM.
And we connect it in exactly the same
manner that we just discussed.
So, the instruction input of
the CPU is taken from the output
of the instruction memory, and so we have
the current instruction to operate on and
in the process of executing this
instruction we are going to compute
the address of the next instruction
that has to be fetched and
this address is going to be
emitted by the program counter.
And it goes all the way into
the address of the instruction unit,
of the instruction memory unit, and,
this unit in turn will then emit
the next instruction that has to
be executed in the next cycle.
Now, the CPU in this, sub diagram
here is kind of spinning its wheels.
And nothing, nothing is actually
being done with its outputs.
So in order to do something useful with
the outputs of the CPU, we connect them
to the memory unit, according to the
contract that we described several times.
What we want to write, where we want
to write it, and the, load bit.
And finally,
we take the output of the memory, and
we connect it back into, the CPU,
because many instructions,
that we want to operate on the memory and
on not on the right into it.
And this is all.
This is our computer architecture.
All we have to add now is,
the overall interface,
of the architecture, and
the, output and input units.
And we see that the only thing that the
user, of this computer sees when he works
with this computer is the display unit,
the keyboard and the reset button.
And this, once again, wraps up,
everything that we want to say about,
building this, computer architecture.
And when I look at this architecture and
reflect back on everything that, we did so
far I'm reminded by this quote about
what it means to be beautiful.
We ascribe beauty to that which is simple,
which has no superfluous spots,
which exactly answers its end,
which stands related to all things,
which is the mean of many extremes.
This was said, 120 years ago by,
Ralph Waldo Emerson.
I hope that you too agree with me that,
the Hack computer is beautiful
according to this, standard.
And one reason why it is so aesthetic
is because it's incredibly simple.
You know all you have to do in
order to build this, computer here,
provided you built these three chips,
is write something like three lines of
HDL code which is quite remarkable.
And so this exactly is what,
what we're going to do in the next unit.
Now that we described the overall
architecture, we will show you how to
actually build these, three chips,
put them together, and have a Hack
computer that you can actually use to run
every program that comes to your mind.